Hi and welcome to the chapter
two or section two, whatever
you like to call this one.
Now in this section we would go
with the data types.
Now whenever you learn any
programming language there are just
two types of thing you have to
learn formally, the first one being
what is the type of data.
For example, are those data numbers
or are those data like names?
We call them as strings
in programming terms.
Now numbers could also be
of variety of types.
It could be regular number, it
could be with the decimal number,
it could be imaginary numbers.
In case you are not familiar
with the math, we do have IOTA
numbers which are maths heavy
number which have a real part
as well as imaginary part.
We have a lot of mathematics that
can be done in the Python world.
So the first part of learning
programming language is
to understand the types of the data
as we call them as data types.
The next part is how do
we manipulate that data?
For example I want to add
the numbers, multiply the numbers
or probably change the name
to uppercase or lowercase or
validate, that's a valid email
or not in the format.
There are a lot of things that we do.
This is exactly what we're going
to learn in this section,
the data types part and we
will understand some of the behind
the scene of the Python
that how it stores the data.
There's a great concept in Python
known as mutability immutability.
We'll have a discussion on this one.
It's a very fantastic concept.
Once you actually see it
from my perspective you will
absolutely love it and you
will never forget about it.
So this is all that we will
be doing in this section
and with this let me go ahead
and take you onto the screen.
Let's start with the section one.
We'll go on our board,
by the board I mean the black
board that we have been using.
So let's go up here and we
will be working and learning
through this one.
So this one we want to go with
two things first and then we'll
study about anything else.
And these are our objects.
Now what are objects?
We will have a discussion on this
and as well as we are going
to talk about mutability.
So this is our objective for this
entire whole section as well.
But we'll pick the topics one by one.
So let me just get your entire focus
on the screen itself so that we can
go ahead and just talk about that.
First of all let's talk
about what is object.
Now in Python there is a concept that
you're going to see that Is called
as everything is object in Python.
And this is very true.
What do you mean by object?
Literally anything that
you see is an object.
And the one thing that you have to
remember always about the object,
that if we are terming anything
as an object, so let's go ahead
and write that it needs to have
few of the properties mentioned
up.
For example, this is the object.
So every single object
will have a unique id.
And we call this one as identity.
And this is like
a tea has a unique blend.
And again, this is a bit
of a vague example, but you
will get this in a minute.
So we have this identity, Every
object have this unique identity.
And I will walk you through how
to find out that every object will
also have a unique type as well.
What do you mean by unique type?
The type simply means just like
in the T, we have the black T, we
have green T, we have herbal T.
So every object will have
its own type as well.
And further, each of the object
will have some of the value.
For example, like 2,
maybe hitesh, maybe chai code.
Each object will have the value
and we will see them,
don't you worry on that part.
So we're going to see that we
do have this object with us.
And once we have this object,
we are going to see that.
All right, so we have this
identity types and everything
they are associated with that.
Let's put them in the nice
diagram so that we actually enjoy
learning part of it as well.
And let me go ahead and grab this.
So whenever object comes
to your mind, make sure object will
have an identity, make sure
the object will have a type
and make sure the object actually
represents all the values.
The value could be empty,
that is also a part of this.
But we'll actually go
ahead and visualize this.
Now there's another
minor concept that we are going
to go through about this is
mutable, and image mutable.
This is really
an interesting concept.
Mutable simply means,
that is changeable.
And this is the concept where
a lot of people get it
absolutely wrong about
the mutability and immutability.
So the word mutable means that this
thing can be changed and then there
is immutable that is not changeable.
So always keep that in mind.
This is the easiest example.
So immutable means no, I cannot
go ahead and change this.
We will see an example.
And this actually ID helps us.
This identity helps us
to figure out whether it's actually
changeable or it's not changeable.
Never ever go through with the value.
If you go ahead and have this,
confirmation about whether it's
mutable or immutable with the value,
then that is the wrong way.
Never do it like this.
So this is where I would love
to write as no,
never check it with the value.
This is not a good idea.
Never check it with a value.
Same goes for here.
If you're checking whether
it's changeable or not
changeable with the value.
Nope, that's always a bad idea.
If you want to check it
with the identity.
Yes, that is how we do it.
If the identity is same, that means
hey, value didn't got changed.
If the identity is different,
hey, value got changed.
So this yes part is all up here.
Let me go ahead and put some
diagrams or some boxes around it
to make it look nice.
There we go.
All right, makes sense.
Looks good.
Okay, time for some practical
to understand this.
Just to summarize this again.
Each object has some identity,
some type and some value.
And objects can also be
mutable or immutable.
Mutable means this is changeable.
Immutable means this
is not changeable.
And we always validate that through
the identity, not through the value.
A lot of beginners who get started
in the world of Python
always look for it with the value,
which is a wrong indicator.
Please make sure you
don't do the mistake.
You will not do that mistake
because I am here with you.
Let's go ahead and create
a new folder.
Let's call this1 as 02 underscore.
This is data types.
All right.
We will also open this up
in the integrated terminal so
that we can actually work
on it easily and nicely.
I will go ahead and create a new
file and we're going to call this
one as chapter one dot P Y.
We can use chapter underscore one.
That will be good dot P Y.
Now how do we go with that?
First of all, we can name
anything as variable.
So let's just say, for example, you
want to get a sugar amount, how much
sugar you want to have in the cup.
Maybe you want to have two cups
or two spoons of the sugar.
I really don't judge you based
on if you want to have 2 tablespoon
or teaspoon, whatever you like.
Now first of all, let's see how we
can actually print this value.
This is something which
is stored in memory.
And I will depict you
with the diagram as well.
We use a keyword F.
Then we can use double quotes
to put up the string.
And then we can use something like
initial sugarsugar
and then put up a column, then use
the curly braces and yes,
they come always in the pair.
Now here I can actually go ahead
and inject the variable to actually
go ahead and print this out.
This is it.
We have written our first program
where we have a variable and we
are trying to print that
variable along with a, string.
First let's see the output of it.
Then we'll actually draw some
diagrams to understand this.
So all to run for this or
to make sure that this runs, I have
to say Python 3, please run a file
known as chapter1py.
Make sure the path
is correct for you.
I have opened the integrated
terminal just right here.
So it says initial sugar 2.
If I change this from 2 to 12 again.
Now the program actually says 12.
So let's see what is happening here
with the help of diagram.
So this is your computer memory
and in this memory you say
that, hey, I want to store
this value 2 or 12, 2 would be
good 2 inside my memory.
So you said, okay, so the memory
is going to create a number two
for you just like this.
I'll make this a little
bit bigger one.
And now how do you actually
call this memory?
So to call this memory you
actually created a variable
known as sugar amount.
And then you actually said that, hey,
in order to point to this memory
I will just go ahead and use this.
And through this I will go ahead
and point out this part here.
Again, super simple.
You have this one here, pretty nice.
I'll just go ahead and remove this,
draw it again, let's use the arrow.
There we go.
So this is what exactly happened.
Now, interestingly, what I want
to show you about the mutable
and immutable part, which most
people goes absolutely wrong.
When I go ahead and say sugar
amount is going to equal to,
let's just say 12 this time.
And I actually go ahead
and use the same thing again.
Let's go up here.
So we are printing sugar.
So what do you think
should have happened here?
The sugar amount was 2
and sugar amount is 12.
And now if I try to print it and
we'll call this one as second,
easier to find it out which one
is what if I go ahead and run
this, we can say initial sugar
is 2 and second initial sugar is
12.
Now here's the interesting part.
Now this thing is
here what we have done.
The numbers
are considered as immutable.
They do not change.
But again, the point is, hey,
Hitesh, this just changed here.
We initially were
having the value of 2.
Now we have a value of 12.
So it definitely changed.
How can you say that?
This is immutable.
This cannot be changed.
This is where a lot of people
make it absolutely wrong
in the Python, as I mentioned, you
never check it with the value.
The value definitely of the sugar
amount is getting changed.
But behind the scene, this number
itself is actually immutable.
This never changed.
What Python did behind the scene for
you is it took this number and it
actually created a new number.
This time it says, hey, you want 12?
Okay, we'll give you 12.
So a new number was created
for you, and this time instead
of pointing to the two, you
are pointing actually to 12.
Yeah, this is a little bit
of an interesting aspect of
how Python actually works.
So instead this time we simply
go ahead and say that, hey, we
are pointing to 12, not two.
This two is still here.
This is immutable,
you cannot change it.
What you're changing
now is reference.
Always remember what we are changing.
What seems to be changing
in the world of mutable
is the reference.
So you are changing the reference.
You are not changing the actual
value itself.
I'll show you that.
Yes, some of these
values do get changed.
You might be asking,
what's the proof of it?
Yeah, that's a good question.
As I mentioned, always check
for identity, never for the value.
Yeah, our value got changed.
But I asked you, hey, not
to track with the values.
There's a big no here.
Now, what I want to do is change
or track based on identity.
So how can we find
the identity of it?
It's actually super easy.
All we got to do is print.
And for any of the ID you want
to check, let's
just say we will use F strings.
Again, these are formatted strings.
So I will just say ID of
2 and then I want to print an ID.
So I'll just go ahead and say
that, hey, use curly braces.
Inside the curly braces you have
a keyword ID to find ID of anything.
I want to find an ID of 2,
and similarly I want to
find the ID of, 12 also.
So let's just say 12.
And what you're going to notice,
the ID of 2 is always same
in your program, but what's
being changed is this ID of 12.
Let's go ahead and run this program
to understand it better.
So you will notice you get a unique
ID here, and you get a unique ID
of this one is actually 12.
We just missed one here.
12.
Let's run this again.
And what we see is this one
is different for your program,
and this one is totally
different in your program.
This is 680 at the end,
this is 3, 60 at the end.
And this is the most important part
because you have
created a new reference.
It's just the variable which is
behind the scene pointing
to a different memory location.
And that's the magic.
That's the part which a lot
of people don't understand
about mutable and immutable.
So summarizing this,
mutable means that's changeable.
Immutable means this
cannot be changed.
Never reference them by the value.
Always check the mutability
and immutability
via the identity itself.
A pretty interesting
concept, isn't it?
So that's really nice.
You might be wondering, hey, can
we get some of the examples,
of the things which are mutable
that really do get changed?
Yes, of course, why not?
You ask for it, I will deliver it.
Let's just call this one as,
chapter two PY and let's write
some of the code which is
mutable, which is changeable.
So I'll just go ahead and say I want
to have a spice mix and which is
going to be represented by set.
Set is also a data type
which represents a collection
of the things.
So so far we have been doing
and checking just the numbers.
Numbers are individual, but,
but let's just say you want
to collect a whole lot of numbers
or whole lot of other
things, maybe collection
of strings, collection of names.
So for that set is used,
we will learn a lot
of these different types.
So let's just say I want
to print and I will go ahead
and say, initial spice mix.
What does it mean?
So I'll just go ahead and say initial
spice mix id, just like that.
And we're going to go ahead
and say use curly braces.
Then we'll use again the ID
and we're going to go ahead and say
give me the ID of spice mix
so that I can see whether it's
changing or not changing.
This is mutable, this
is supposed to change.
So now if I go ahead and say, hey,
spice mix, I want to add tolu.
Python is all about if you can
read English, you can read this.
So let's just say my favorite one,
I want to add ginger for it.
So we have added ginger
and we're going to use one more
probably cardamom.
Cardamom.
There we go.
So we have added two values
in it and now we would look
to see that whether the ID
has been changed or not.
So I'll just use this one
and I'll just Move it.
And by the way, I love
keyboard shortcuts.
I have spent a good amount of time in
VS code, so I know the shortcuts of.
If you want to know about this one,
let me just show you because I'm
pretty sure you'll be asking if
you want to duplicate any line,
you can just press shift and
option key on or the alt key on
your keyboard and it actually
duplicates that.
And that's how I duplicate that.
And if you want to have it duplicate
and then want to move any line,
just press the alt key or the option
key and then it moves up here.
So that's how I actually run
fast in the VS code.
Again, super fun to have it.
So let's just say initial Spice Mix
and then we are going to go ahead
and say after Spice Mix, let's see
whether the ID gets changed or not.
This.
So we're going to go
ahead and say Python 3.
Please go ahead and run
chapter two this time.
And there we go.
So we can see this ID.
Actually we can see this.
This is 944.
So there we go.
We can see this.
This is mutable.
This is changing.
So if I print out what is inside
the spice mix, before that.
Yes, definitely we
have added something.
But again this always is.
This is mutable part.
All right, I hope you got this.
And yes, I do understand this
confusion here that hey, this
value didn't change up here.
So how you're calling this
as mutable, immutable
and all of these things.
Let me get you back onto
the board because I know this
requires more explanation.
So we get this set here.
So this is how the set looks like.
Let's also print the set as well.
That how does the set
actually looks like.
So we're going to go ahead and say,
instead of putting up the id,
we'll just go ahead and just
print the spice mix so that, you
know, how does it look like?
And after printing this,
we will also print this.
All right, so this is
the initial ID that we have.
Initially the set was empty
and then we actually were able
to add values into this
and still we get the exact same id.
So the whole concept.
Let me just write this here.
So the whole concept of mutable
and immutable is what value can
I change and what values I cannot
change in the memory itself.
So when I said the numbers are
immutable, this simply means
that I cannot change this number's
existence in the memory.
This will always remain like
That I can change the reference
where I'm pointing, but nothing
can actually be changed.
This is known as immutable.
I cannot change it.
But when I went into the spice mix,
I was able to constantly
add more spices into this.
Notice here.
First we added ginger,
then we add cardamom.
So I am just always pointing this
so the same object can be changed.
I can just go up, come up here
and can say, hey, instead of
cardamom, I'll probably add a lemon.
And that is totally fine.
I can mutate it.
It is mutable.
So if I run this again,
yes, I'm able to mutate this thing.
I'm able to change this thing still.
The ID remains exactly same.
And that's the whole concept
behind mutable and immutable.
You change it or you don't
change it in the memory.
And again, this is the whole point.
So I hope now it makes it
absolutely clear that numbers,
they are immutable.
We cannot change them.
The reference can be changed,
but they always remain same.
While on the other hand, the things
like set, they are mutable,
they can be changed in the memory.
You can always point
to the same thing.
You actually always points
So I hope this gets you now the clear
about the confusion
of mutable, immutable, what it's
like, because this is the core
foundation in the whole object.
Rest of the things
are super easy to work on with.
I hope these diagrams helps you
to actually clear, up the confusion.
And if you enjoyed this lecture,
please don't forget to rate us.
We really need that.
We really work hard for this.
And even your smallest rating
can help us in boosting our
emotions and morale.
Let's catch up in the next video.